How do we get more stimulus in a shorter
period of time? And it's important for
the viewer to understand that shorter
period of time has nothing to do with
convenience or laziness or whatever,
>> right?
>> It's because you only have so much, as
Arthur would say, gas in the tank,
right? you which really means you only
have so much glycogen.
[Music]
Hi, my name is John Jacquish. I am a
doctor of biomedical engineering and I
frequently discuss topics on human
physiology, human performance,
professional athletics and today we're
going to be talking about some history
of sports performance and some
advancements probably some of the most
important advancements sports
performance has ever seen. In this
particular video, we're going to be
talking about the developments of Arthur
Jones, the founder of Nautilus. And I
have here with me today an expert on the
subject Mr. America natural
John Hart and also Mr. Universe. Got
both those titles naturally. Correct.
Yes sir. Yes sir. I won the natural Mr.
Universe and the Mr. America when it was
drug tested. Yes sir. Awesome. All
right. So you've been a bit of a
historian on the more highintensity
science-based guys. Now keep in mind the
science was almost non-existent back
then. So that some of it was like trial
and error and then they just publish it
in like Flex Magazine and that was about
as scientific as it was. Yeah, this is
absolutely true. John, the guys back in
the day as they would use the word
scientific. I would say that Arthur
Jones however was one of the guys who
did take the time to put he threw a lot
of money into his own research
>> uh and got universities involved with
him in various studies. So that aspect
of his part in this history is pretty
intriguing because he did have the best
that could be offered at the time.
Right.
>> And so his his work with his inventions
in Nautilus as well as the development
of the cam. He didn't use a simple
circular cam. right? Was the very first
time that he actually took into account
or anybody really heard about variable
resistance. He was the one who actually
just set it all off. And now we had
something. Wow. He tried to match
something up.
>> Yeah.
>> You know, forces matching up with the
curve of muscles, the strength curve of
muscles. The strongest parts had more
force, weaker parts had weaker force.
But still, you train the muscle at every
point in the range of motion, full range
of motion. So he's the guy who initiated
just bang everything and took us from a
simple barbell into a whole new level
and for you know the 1970s that was 1970
1969 1970 that's amazing. Let me explain
just so just so the viewers know what
we're talking about.
>> Yeah.
>> A cam like imagine a pulley. So a pulley
is a wheel and the cable or chain runs
across it. It does not change the force.
However, when you make a pulley that's
like this.
Instead, what happens is as you move,
the chain gets pulled from its center of
gravity and the weight goes up. So,
basically, you'd be handling let's say X
back here and maybe 1.2x or 1.3x at the
top.
Yes, that's exactly right. Totally true.
As the cam rotates, the forces change.
Correct? And they increase at the
important parts, the parts where you
want more, or they decrease at the parts
where you want less, obviously.
And this is all in an effort to create a
deeper level of fatigue in a shorter
period of time, which is always will be
the greatest stimulus for muscle growth.
>> Right? You know, I see volume training
and I understand what they're trying to
do. They're trying to collect as much
fatigue as possible. By spreading it out
over a longer period of time, you end up
running out of glycogen in the muscle
and you're just doing what's called junk
volume.
>> Well said. That's true. Yeah. Yeah. Beat
your head against the wall, wasting your
time. You're not going to get anything
out of it.
>> Yes. And Arthur being well ahead of his
time, he used a type of a routine mainly
full body routines with his machines
wherein
he used an element of rush fac. It was
called rush factor training you know
where the time element was involved as
well where a certain amount of work done
within a given amount of time and you
kept track of that so you knew how much
you did within that time. So, intensity
levels. If you came back the next
workout and you took an additional 10
minutes to do the same amount of work,
did you really increase the see your
head? There you go. Right? You know, you
know the answer. You didn't. You didn't
increase the intensity. So, you have to
know about how long your workouts take.
I mean, within a a reasonable time
frame, right? And so Arthur, he would
use rust factor training, full body
workouts, stimulate the muscles, the
full body, and he would do that and he
would have his students do that once,
twice, three times a week. Back then the
standard was three times a week
training. And he used full body training
to do that with. He'd rotate the
exercises, but it was mainly nautilus
and a few barbell exercises, key
exercises like squats. He believed
heavily in doing barbell squats, which
you've made great points in our
discussions about whoever came up with
balancing a barbell on up on the top of
their spine.
>> Yeah. Like I have something really heavy
to pick up. Let me stack it on the back
of my neck.
>> Right. Right. And I I'll be the first
one to tell you people on, you know, in
my channel and Mr. America Heart, they
will who have followed me for a few
years, they know that I've been very pro
uh basics. have been very pro, you know,
barbell squat, deadlift, you all. Yes,
yes, yes, yes. Why are you stopping
doing that? Why are you going to stop
doing that? But really, it's the basics,
okay? There are better forms of
squatting, a front squat versus a back
squat. You know, you change the center
point of gravity. I mean, our entire
body, we move in a sagittal plane.
>> Yeah. Exactly. And of course, the best,
you know, I would think the best is if
you had access to something like a
Nautilus or I will say this flat out and
I don't I don't want to make it sound
like an infomercial because you really
blessed me with those X3 the X3 bar the
bands and I've really been enjoying
>> you speaking the truth.
>> I I am I'm speaking the truth. So for
all of you all who don't know, Dr. John
was on my channel and I did an extensive
interview with him. Several. Okay, we
chopped it up to several because we went
we went for so long. And the one thing
that we have in common here is our our
hardcore belief in variable resistance.
That is the biggest common ground that
we have besides the fact that he's just
a good-looking man. I I I don't know why
you're a handsome dude, too.
And so that being the case, variable
resistance, we just kind of launched off
from that into discussions in all things
highintensity training and why in fact
having those fatigue points, you know,
whether you in this case, let's just say
with the X3 bar, X3 bands, man, the very
first time, Dr. John, that you explained
that one and you you pulled it out.
Failing out near the furthest point on a
bench press with those bands, failing
there where you cannot complete a rep.
Going again, failing a couple of inches
closer than that. Go again. Failing a
couple inches closer than that. This is
the vital vital importance. These are
the the fatigue points that are
necessary to stimulate muscle growth.
taking the rest pause, doing it again.
You know, this eliminates the need for
junk volume. This is the part that
>> Well, this I mean I I think what Arthur
was trying to say and then we're going
to do multiple parts of the of this
subject and we're going to talk about
high intensity and who the key figures
are. We're starting with Arthur Jones,
>> right?
>> And we're going to also move on to Mike
Messer, Dorian Yates, and then Westside
Barbell.
>> Yes. uh because it's like everybody was
working on the same thing which is how
do we get more stimulus in a shorter
period of time and it's important for
the viewer to understand that shorter
period of time has nothing to do with
convenience or laziness or whatever
>> right
>> it's because you only have so much as
Arthur would say gas in the tank
>> you which really means you only have so
much glycogen.
>> Glycogen, that's it. I don't care if
you're, you know, you eat like an
unsupervised child and you're ramming
carbohydrates in your mouth all the
time. It doesn't mean you store more
glycogen. It just means you're getting
fatter. It's like you just only have so
many opportunities to go to fatigue. And
if you can get more done with less,
>> right?
>> Now, by less, I mean time. I don't mean
effort. I don't mean less time under
tension. I mean more tension under less
time.
>> All right. More of everything else,
right? More effort, more tension, more
fatigue. More fatigue.
>> More fatigue. Yes. In less time. That
that is absolutely the key.
>> And it's like it's volume and high
intensity training are basically exactly
the same thing. It's just what do you
want the schedule to look like? And if
you take a high intensity approach, you
won't run out of glycogen,
>> right?
>> You'll be able very easily. If you go
down the volume road,
>> I mean, yeah, it's a lot tougher. And
even in the X3 hypertrophy program, it
wasn't crazy volume, right? It was a
couple sets per body part as opposed to
one cuz the original is just one set per
And you know, here's another thing. Like
a lot of the guys who advocate for high
intensity, you know, they'll say like
just one set. One set's all you need.
And then they do four different
exercises per body part.
>> Mhm. Yeah. Yeah. Which is not really one
set. It's more than one set, but it's
very low amount of sets. Yeah. Yeah.
Absolutely true. Um when you when you
first when we the first time that we
spoke and you brought up the issue of
those fatigue points, I very quickly had
a vision in my head of wow, we just
eliminated every single bit of junk
volume, everything, and took this right
to it's like going to the heart of the
matter and
taking out just what you wanted, just
what you needed. And those fatigue
points, John, Dr. John, I'm not a
scientist, okay? But I have a great
understanding of what we're after. So
going after aggressively those fatigue
points, seeking them out within a given
set. Okay? And that set with the rest
pause is going to be kind of lengthy
when it's done. And you'll be gassed
when you're done. Gas obviously blowing
out the glycogen. You're not going to be
able to handle multiple attempts at
this. That's the thing. And and still be
able to recover, grow. It's just not
going to happen that way. So I, you
know, much like in our discussion like
we're having right now going from Arthur
Jones and the evolution from him to Mike
Mener, Dorian and even um and even
Westside
Dr. John the thing about that is is you
have to be open-minded to change,
willing to change, especially when
number one back then it was more of just
on a make sense basis. Guys like Louis
Simmons, they took everything and what
made sense? How can we apply that to the
training? Now, we have the advantage
right now of an additional 25 years of
research, okay, over most of those guys.
>> And when we can be willing to
take the best of what was already done
and combine that with the research, I
don't see how you can miss when there's
conflicting research on a subject,
especially if the research is done well,
which usually it is. Like I mean there's
not a lot of sports performance clowns
out there. Like if you if you bothered
to study this you you know and and also
it's it's not oncology. It's not the
study of cancer. I don't want to say
it's simple cuz it's not
>> but there's a lot less of what's going
on. And also the idea of a harsh
environment stimulating the body to
create an adaptive response can be
noticed in you know building a callous
on your hand can be noticed in getting a
suntan.
>> So it's not like adaptive response is
like some like whoa you just have no
idea how it works and we know pretty
well how it works right.
>> So I think the best explanation is one
that can address both sides of the
literature.
So like when we talk about
collecting as much fatigue
>> as possible,
high intensity and high volume
accomplish both of those objectives,
>> right?
>> It's just the context.
How like do we want to run into the
problem of running out of glycogen?
Because if you're doing high volume
training, that's that's going to be your
issue. If you're doing high intensity
training, you don't have an issue.
>> Okay. So, Arthur Jones. Okay. We keep
coming back to Arthur Jones.
>> That's why we're doing this video.
Absolutely.
>> It's like his own evolution.
>> This guy really had it figured out. is
like, let's create set of machines that
give you a much deeper level of fatigue,
>> meaning you're just going to be able to
grow more muscle faster and you won't
have to spend your life in the gym,
>> right? And so he the model, it's so
funny you say this, two points to make
here. One is the model that he set up in
the gym for most commercial gyms and the
second part is how he evolved from three
to two to one set. Okay. So, watch me
now.
>> In his own, we'll call it quote unquote
research because he did have some form
of research going on, but also in his
research with his clients, the pro
bodybuilders he worked with a lot. Okay?
But he would observe. Okay? And the
thing that he had found was two sets
actually worked better than three sets.
This was out of necessity, not he kind
of stumbled upon that at one point. He
was not being too theoretical. At one
point, he just didn't have the time to
train as much and he couldn't train as
long. He cut down those three sets of
each exercise down to one or two. Two of
immediately and he got better progress.
Better progress for him. He's a busy
man. You know, the man owned companies,
okay? He wasn't. So, for himself, he
still did train.
He went from three sets down to two.
What was going on? Well, he's not
blowing all his glycogen and going into
total overtraining and, you know, doing
a bunch of junk volume technically
speaking, right? Three down to two
eventually. And in all of his later
writings, it was two sets are better
than three, one is better than two
because he ended up on that end, one set
of each exercise. And again, he was
still going three times a week, full
body workouts. So you're looking at the
frequency factor was important but not
necessarily
well the frequency factor was very
important and the volume within the
workout was getting smaller smaller
smaller but he kept that frequency at
three times a week. So he was he was
blowing up that protein synthesis every
48 hours and then he take the weekend
off and take off 72 hours. Right. But he
was still doing something along the
lines of what we've talked about that
you confirmed the research. You know
that major protein synthesis after a
workout. How long does it last?
>> 36 hours. Okay. Now we know some protein
synthesis is still happening right after
the 13 36 hours. But sure but otherwise
it wouldn't be alive.
>> I mean the the protein synthesis that
would happen if you didn't train
>> right the body the body does like
growing muscle.
>> Right. Right. You know, there's there's
instances I in fact I just did a video
about a fasting study
>> where the test group that was doing
every other day fasting. It was like
basically normally eating every other
day.
>> Right. And the alternate days they ate
nothing.
>> Right. These people in I think it was 24
weeks they put on I think it was 2.2
kilos of muscle.
>> Mhm.
>> They didn't train.
>> Oh, come on.
>> No training. Neither group did any. This
was not an exercise study.
>> Oh wow. Wow. That's exciting.
>> Yeah. There's a whole chapter in my book
about this particular study.
>> Wow.
>> And the reason I think it's important is
because a lot of the fasting studies,
>> they measure right at the end of the
fast. Well, at the end of the fast,
you're depleted.
>> Mhm.
>> Like you're dehydrated. In the way a lot
of the measurement techniques
work,
they they measure body water. Basically
like a DEXA scan, we'll see fat and then
not fat. So what's not fat? Bone,
muscle, organs.
>> Right. Muscle muscle's made 70% of
water. So you just dehydrated yourself
temporarily speaking.
>> Right. Right. So when you're dehydrated,
it looks like you lost muscle, which is
a lot of these studies.
>> And I don't blame the guys who are
reporting this because they just don't
know.
>> Right. Right.
>> Like Right. If you do a fast,
rehydrate before you determine if you
lost muscle or not.
>> Yeah, that's good.
>> Because I've been doing fasting. In
fact, as soon as we got on camera,
you're like, "Oh, dude, you lost
weight." Obviously, yes. Yeah. I mean,
oh, dude, I'm I'm I'm shredded.
>> You're getting hard. Of course, some
electrolytes wouldn't hurt either,
right? Some good electrolyte powder or
something to go with that water.
>> So, last week I did a I did a 5day
foragen fast. Mhm.
>> So, I took six doses of essential amino
acids, portigen per day,
>> uh, and and one packet of electrolytes.
>> There you go.
>> Before I went to bed. Yeah, you need it.
It's good. It's good.
>> It's good.
>> Yeah. And I mean, weight just fell off
me. Mental focus. Awesome. I lost no
muscle. Basically, I lost 14 here.
Listen to this. I lost 14 lbs during the
week, but then when I rehydrated over
the weekend,
>> Yes.
>> I It turns out I was a net loss of
eight.
>> Right. Right.
>> Not bad.
>> All fact. So 6 lbs of water came back.
But if this had been a study, they would
have said I lost six pounds of muscle.
>> Yes. But I didn't lose any muscle.
>> This is great. This is great. So let me
get back to the second point about
Arthur. Okay. This was really important.
That's why I said it out loud so I
remember. First thing is is the
evolution of his own training and
recommendations on training went from
three and this was taken to it wasn't
just momentary muscular failure. He was
doing force reps negatives. He was huge
on eccentric training. Okay, he was
massive a big believer on eccentric
training. So he was really tearing
bodies up at that point, you know,
between doing three sets of everything.
How could I don't know how without the
steroids you could recover, you know, 48
hours and then do that again, you know,
I mean, over and over again, but going
from three sets down to two eventually
to one. And then with that one, at that
point, his big blue machines, they were
called the Big Blue Monsters. Those
machines back in the 70s, they made
their way commercially to every gym
around the world. If you didn't have
Nautilus equipment, then you were
lacking somehow. But those machines,
maybe not the full line, but those
machines made it around the world in the
70s and in the 80s, they were still when
I started working out in the 80s, the
mid 80s, they were still in the gyms.
Most of the gyms had a universal machine
and then it was Nautilus and then
barbells and dumbbells. And those
Nautilus machines were everywhere
throughout the 80s, '7s, '8s, and then
it was increasing into the 80s. And then
around the '9s, they started to fade off
as the years went by. We discussed this
before on my channel about the smooth.
>> Yeah, exactly.
>> People didn't get it. So, isn't this
funny? Right. So, it devolved at that
point. They went by feelings instead of
what actually worked. I mean, the human
history is full of advancements that
people didn't understand.
>> You know, like how about the
turbocharger?
>> Right. Right.
>> Turbochargers first came out,
everybody's like, "Oh, they're a pain in
the ass. They cause extra maintenance."
Yeah. Except they make the car way more
efficient.
>> Efficient. I was going to say
>> so like now almost every car has a
turbocharger.
>> Right. Right.
>> You know, it's like people didn't get
it. They like we had turbos in the 80s
and then everybody went away from it
thinking it was just bad or something
like that. They didn't they didn't get
it.
>> Right.
>> And now because we have um you know
government saying automobiles need to
burn less gas. Oh, okay. Well, we know
how to do that. turbocharger.
>> Yeah, finally. Right. Coming back full
circle. Right.
>> Right. And I mean, they still need to
work out a couple problems. Like I don't
know if you remember like cars in the
80s that had turbos. Like you'd be in a
turn and then and you know you'd have a
certain amount of power and then all of
a sudden the turbo would kick in and
back.
>> Not good.
>> Yeah. Right. I don't know. I was really
the 911 turbo which has the the weight
too far back.
>> Right. I mean, my
>> really know what you're doing. Like Joe
Rogan has a good rant about this. And I
I mean, if you know how to drive a car
like that, okay, but if you're used to
driving, you know, a car with a little
more even balancing, like the 911 is not
that.
>> Mhm. And yeah, the turbos would kick in
and cars would just, you know,
>> just my my uncle my uncle I was about to
say my uncle had that exact vehicle, the
911 turbo, and it was
>> uh you know, you're right. The the
weight, the distribution was different.
>> So, we're talking about the model that
Arthur Jones created. Okay. Well,
suddenly he was able to flip that into
not just the machines being bought
around the world. Okay. And he sold a
lot of these machines which technically
were correct.
>> He also sold and the gym model was you
had this room full of this Nautilus
equipment all around the walls and you
could sell a 15minute workout on people.
They would come into the gym on their
lunch break and they would go one time
through and they would learn how to
train to momentary muscular failure with
variable resistance.
the best you could find. And they would
do that and they'd blast on through,
whip out their glycogen all within 17
minutes or 15 minutes. They head off to
the showers, boom, be going heading back
to work or go to lunch for real, and
then go back to work. And so this was a
type of a system that was common, okay,
all through the mid80s into the I worked
at gyms that had this program set up
where you would have a a kid that was
basically trained to show people how to
adjust the seats. That was about it.
Problem is is that to make a cultural
movement, you can't get enough people
involved in that before it bankrupts
itself.
>> Huh. which is what happened because the
same thing happened when Arthur sold
Nautilus and then started Medex. Med X,
>> which was like a, you know, almost like
first class version of the Nautilus
equipment,
>> like
>> adjustable everything, comfortable as
hell. But it's like, okay, now you
created even bigger barriers because
these machines are so expensive to open
up a studio. You got to spend if you
wanted a Medex studio today, million
dollars easily.
>> Million dollars. Each piece is 60 grand.
That even more,
>> right? So, it's it's like when I looked
at that dynamic, I'm like,
>> "Yeah,
>> okay. I need to change the world."
>> Because Arthur didn't get there,
>> right?
>> And I know why. It was because,
>> and I mean, I I hate simplifying it, but
if if you were standing right next to
me, he'd appreciate this comment.
Arthur, you made your stuff too
expensive. Boom.
>> Because if I mean that's part of the
reason why when people look at X3 and
they're like, "Oh, it's so simple."
>> Right. Which also means it's not
expensive.
>> Mhm. Mhm.
>> I mean the entire gym can be replaced by
a $550 product.
>> Right. Like Right. Right. And also
anybody who complains about the price,
it's like, okay, so you're complaining
that you don't have $500
because I notice people who are not
interested in buying something don't go
look up the price.
>> Yeah, it's true.
>> Yeah. So,
>> they're just going to get it. They're
driven.
>> Sorry, you don't have 500 bucks. But the
like $500 for a serious I mean Yeah.
Yeah. There's junk fitness products that
are just like I roll, you know, the
perfect push-up or whatever that are
$35, but it's like nobody gets fit from
those.
>> No. And
>> and doctor, I'll tell you what, since
having you on my channel and seeing all
the comments and in my private
community, the comments that have come
up, it's the X3 is not simply bands.
Okay, that part right there,
>> bands by themselves suck.
>> You have a good ad out. I want to
commend you. And you're showing someone
playing with bands. I guess they were
doing curls and snapped up and hit him
in the face.
>> Yeah. Hit him in the face.
>> It was just
>> That's why you don't use bands. That was
>> Yeah. You need you need something to
keep your ankles and your wrists
>> neutral.
>> Yes.
>> When they're neutral, you can put a lot
of power through them. When they are not
neutral, you you have neural inhibition.
Your your neurology is turning muscles
off.
>> Yes.
>> So you don't trouble. trouble. We
credit, we commend not only Arthur with
having a nice invention, a a world
changing invention initially, but also
he had a routine that he also sold the
masses on that I'm going to say this
doctor, it was considered by many
usually, you know, my my my brethren in
iron, the meathead culture, uh it was
considered gimmicky, doesn't work, won't
grow muscle, won't do a thing. Now, I'm
going to tell you, I never told you
this, but my very first year of working
out, all I had access to was Nautilus,
barbells, and dumbbells. Okay?
>> And I did in the very beginning start
off on, and we'll get to that in another
show, Mike Menser's heavy duty training.
That's how I started training. So, he
instilled use Nautilus whenever possible
over a barbell even. So I would and my
brother, my own biological brother would
work out with me. Both of us, here we
go. Both of us, year one, 25 lbs of
muscle on this body. I was a very, very
skinny kid and then 25 lbs. That was it.
To this day, that's probably
the period where you gained the most
muscle mass.
>> Sure. Sure. Well, we know that everyone
will say newbie gains. Everybody will
say that. Okay. Everybody gains 15.
>> Gains is five pounds. It's not 25.
>> And yeah. And the and the the fun part
about it though was even after that in
the ensuing year, two years, three
years, those machines were still around.
Okay. I was able to it was noticeable
improvement on certain body parts where
I was regularly using the Nautilus
machine. Variable resistance. Okay. So,
variable resistance was the key. And
ready for this? Injuries?
>> None.
>> All right.
>> And so that's one of the things that's
super exciting right now. I know this
kind of looks like a friendly interview
and all that stuff because I'm coming on
and but you didn't know when you asked
me to come back on. You you sent me the
product, but I didn't give you the
input. I didn't tell you anything. You
haven't asked.
>> I developed it. So I know how you It's
It's funny. If I send it I remember I I
sent one unit to a reporter who worked
for I want to say like maybe business
insider or something like that like like
the guy had no exercise background
>> and he found it a little frustr like it
sounds like he used it once
>> and was like oh it's you know it's
really too too difficult and it's just
like you get you don't understand what
going to fatigue is.
>> That's right.
>> Yeah. I mean, it was just like,
>> okay, I mean, I also also there's a like
if you don't have any any background on
it, like I think the the the people who
get the most out of X3 are the ones who
tried using barbells and dumbbells,
right, and got nothing out of it.
>> Very, they learned about taking a muscle
to fatigue and you actually have to
train hard. And if you can talk while
you're doing your set, we're doing
nothing.
Nothing. Nothing.
>> Like you might as well just stay in bed.
>> So let me point out, okay, the
similarity between yourself and Arthur
Jones. Okay. The comment you just made
right there. You just said, "If you are
able to talk during a set, you've done
nothing." Okay. He was also quite brash
and outward with his commentary on
how you should be or how you should feel
when you do train. And here were a
couple
people. If people want results, like you
can't lie to them. Like you're going to
need to force this muscle
>> to shut down.
>> Yes.
>> Despite your greatest efforts,
>> the muscle needs to fail.
>> Yes.
>> That's the only way you are getting the
central nervous system to understand
that it needs to add muscle.
>> Yes. Because like I I just the other day
there was a guy who was referencing
Menser and Jones and Yates and he's like
this is the highintensity workout that
Mike Menser would do and he's talking
through his his he's like and then he
recks his own weight when he's done and
it's like dude if you can reack your own
weight you didn't go to fatigue.
>> He didn't know how to do it right like
like talking out of his ass. Can I say
that on this channel?
>> Yeah.
The funny thing was the guy was he's
enhanced.
>> I'm pretty sure.
>> Yeah.
>> He didn't say it wasn't. So anyway,
Jack.
>> So it's like okay, you know, I mean you
he's successful in being a bodybuilder,
but man, that's not the high int like go
look up one of Dorian's workouts.
>> Wow. Like he never reracks his weight.
>> No, man. I mean,
>> no. It's like it's like I mean I I there
was one set uh I think he was doing bend
over rows,
>> right?
>> One of his favorite exercises.
>> He doesn't he doesn't bend like this.
He's at like a 45, you know, like tip
forward a little bit.
>> Yep.
>> Pulling pulling inward into his stomach.
He got to the point where I mean he just
had to drop the [__] bar and like
like one of his eyes like just starting
to roll back in his head like he was
just starting to pass out.
Like that's the kind of intensity you
have to bring. And the great news is
when you do it with X3, all you do is
just set down the bar and the weight is
is not heavy anymore,
>> right? That this has been a fun part of
training this way for
>> in that way. It's like sometimes I'll do
a bent row uh or or like deadlifts where
it's like after I finish my last
diminishing range repetition,
I kind of get down on the ground on my
hands and knees and I'm just gasping for
air. And you know, everybody in the room
was like, "Well, that's fatigue." Uh,
yeah,
>> he got there.
>> Yes. Arthur Jones used to say, uh, that
if you like your workouts, you're
probably doing something wrong.
>> And he also said that if you, now this
is an extreme comment, but he said that
if you haven't thrown up from a set of
barbell curls, then you haven't trained
hard enough
>> barbell curls, you know? I mean, but it
was the point he was trying to make that
training very hard is important. Okay. I
don't think I've ever thrown up from
training. I think while I was training,
but I think it had to do with like
whatever
>> eating too close to the workout is more
like the night before I just had like,
you know, 3 lbs of chicken tikka masala
or something like that and it's just
like
bought it brand new. Get that out. Well,
so we credit him with really coming
across with a highintensity training
routine,
highintensity equipment that was proper
using variable resistance. That's, you
know, historically I look back in in
some ways affectionately if you want to
talk about feelings being involved here
because I I'm thankful that he did
create such things because,
>> you know, it made it easier for me as a
bodybuilder, as a young bodybuilder, to
start working out, do it properly. My
brother did as well, not get hurt, and
learn how to generate intensity and take
things to the point where we were doing
I like your phrase diminishing range. I
like that a lot because we get confused
when we talk about, you know, partial
range, partial rep, lengthened rep, you
know, where lengthen rep where
diminishing means it's getting shorter
and shorter and shorter and shorter.
That's to me that's more accurate. You
know, diminishing range is more
accurate. If you did the same thing that
you do right now with an X3 bar and band
system that Arthur Jones was doing, or I
should say if you took the same process
right now that you're instilling using
the X3 bar and man system and went back
to in the day with Nautilus, you would
do the same exact thing and fail in
diminishing range until it was just
done. One set, you'd be finished. That
would be it. So that's I credit the man
with that for creating great machines
and also with a great routine and taking
into account things like all of the
factors of intensity. That was volume,
that was duration, that was uh frequency
and frequency is days off. So I was
going to say days off. So volume,
frequency, duration are very very
important. So when you start balancing
those out, the harder you train, the
stronger you get, the less you can do of
certain things. You know, you have to
account for it. So, your workouts will
change over time. Absolutely will change
over time. I'm telling you, just as a
bodybuilder who, you know, now I'm 60,
okay? And I I've been doing this for 41
years, and I've trained thousands of
people over 41 years, and every single
person, the physiology is this, the
biochemistry is this. The bigger you
get, the stronger you get, the less
you'll be able to do. you have more
byproducts within a ci a certain set of
an exercise. The less meaning not the
less weight
>> volume goes down as
>> that's it.
>> They're inversely related, right? The
stronger you get. Also, also you and I
think this was something that some of
the science-based lifters when they
comment negatively about Dorian's
program and and you see this all over
the place and I don't think it it I
think they think they're being negative
against high intensity.
>> Mhm.
>> But we're all just talking past each
other. And like I said, if you really
look at the science, it's fatigue we're
chasing.
>> Yes. And the volume approach is just an
inefficient approach to the same thing,
>> right? So, so, okay. So, and I remember
I I've seen some of these guys say like
>> Dorian just was able to fire more
muscle. He was more potentiated.
Therefore, he could take more muscle to
failure. Oh, you mean like he's an
advanced lifter?
>> Yes.
>> Okay.
>> Right. What about the other guys?
>> Yeah. We all get there. You know, that's
what ends up happening is
>> But hey, I I want to be conscious of
your time. This was a solid summary of
of what Arthur Jones did for the
community, and I think everybody will be
better for knowing who that guy is and
what he did.
>> Thank you, doctor. Appreciate your time.
>> Yeah. Awesome. If this video helped you,
I want you to subscribe and follow. I'm
going to put out videos on a regular
basis. I think they're going to help a
whole lot of people, especially if
you're one of those people that doesn't
just instantly grow from lifting regular
weights. We've got the answer for you.